ORIGINALRESEARCH
published:01November2017
doi:10.3389/fncel.2017.00348
Adaptive Changes in the Vestibular
System of Land Snail to a 30-Day
Spaceflight and Readaptation on
Return to Earth
NikolayAseyev1*,AliaKh.Vinarskaya1,MatveyRoshchin1,TatianaA.Korshunova2,
AlekseyYu.Malyshev1,AlenaB.Zuzina1,VictorN.Ierusalimsky1,MariaS.Lemak1,
IgorS.Zakharov2,IvanA.Novikov3,PeterKolosov1,EkaterinaChesnokova1,
SvetlanaVolkova1,ArtemKasianov4,LeonidUroshlev4,YekaterinaPopova5,
RichardD.Boyle5andPavelM.Balaban1
1InstituteofHigherNervousActivityandNeurophysiology,RussianAcademyofSciences,Moscow,Russia,2KoltzovInstitute
ofDevelopmentalBiology,Moscow,Russia,3ResearchInstituteofEyeDiseases,Moscow,Russia,4VavilovInstituteof
GeneralGenetics,RussiaAcademyofSciences,Moscow,Russia,5SpaceBiosciencesResearchofNASAAmesResearch
Center,MoffettField,CA,UnitedStates
Thevestibularsystemreceivesapermanentinfluencefromgravityandreflexivelycontrols
Editedby:
equilibrium. If we assume gravity has remained constant during the species’ evolution,
LisaMapelli,
UniversityofPavia,Italy willitssensorysystemadapttoabruptlossofthatforce?Weaddressthisquestioninthe
Reviewedby: landsnailHelixlucorumexposedto30daysofnearweightlessnessaboardtheBion-M1
Ying-ShingChan,
satellite,andstudiedgeotacticbehaviorofpostflightsnails,differentialgeneexpressions
UniversityofHongKong,HongKong
ChristosFrantzidis, instatocysttranscriptome,andelectrophysiologicalresponsesofmechanoreceptorsto
AristotleUniversityofThessaloniki, applied tilts. Each approach revealed plastic changes in the snail’s vestibular system
Greece
assumed in response to spaceflight. Absence of light during the mission also affected
FelixE.Schweizer,
UCLABrainResearchInstitute, statocyst physiology, as revealed by comparison to dark-conditioned control groups.
UnitedStates
Readaptationtonormaltiltresponsesoccurredat 20hfollowingreturntoEarth.Despite
∼
*Correspondence:
thepermanenceofgravity,thesnailrespondedinacompensatorymannertoitslossand
NikolayAseyev
aseyev@ihna.ru readaptedoncegravitywasrestored.
Keywords:mollusks,gravitysensing,statocyst,neuroplasticity,vestibularsystem,gravitaxis
Received:31July2017
Accepted:19October2017
Published:01November2017
INTRODUCTION
Citation:
AseyevN,VinarskayaAK,
Vertebratesandinvertebratessenseinertialaccelerationandachangeinorientationwithrespect
RoshchinM,KorshunovaTA,
to gravity by mechanoreceptors in the otolith and statolith organs, respectively. The force of
MalyshevAY,ZuzinaAB,
gravity is constantly present on Earth and forms the frame of reference for spatial orientation.
IerusalimskyVN,LemakMS,
ZakharovIS,NovikovIA,KolosovP, Inertialaccelerationsoccurwithinthisgravityframeofreferencenaturallyduringself-generated
ChesnokovaE,VolkovaS,KasianovA, movements or those imparted externally onto the organism by perturbations, such as a slippery
UroshlevL,PopovaY,BoyleRDand surface or a deflected leaf.Kreidl (1893)demonstrated in a clever manner thatthestatocystis a
BalabanPM(2017)AdaptiveChanges mechanosensitiveorgan.Asacrayfishmolts,itleavesbehindthestatolithandmustmanuallyre-
intheVestibularSystemofLandSnail
seeditsstatocystwitha new,typicallysand,weight-lending mass.Kreidlreplacedthesandwith
toa30-DaySpaceflightand
reducedferrousoxideandmanipulatedthecrayfish’spostureusingamagnet,therebysimulating
ReadaptationonReturntoEarth.
Front.Cell.Neurosci.11:348. the action of the normal gravitational field with a magnetic one. Despite the simplicity of the
doi:10.3389/fncel.2017.00348 gastropod organ of balance, there are many functional similarities between the snail’s statocyst
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 1 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
andthemorehighlyevolvedotolithorgansofvertebratespecies lost in space, the astronaut uses other cues, such as vision to
(Popova and Boyle, 2015). Statoreceptors, like hair cells in the perceivean“up”orientation(Clémentetal.,2007).Thelandsnail
vertebrateutricleandsaccule,aremechanoreceptorsthatdepend Helix lucorum Linnaeus (Pulmonata, Gastropoda) also orients
onaweight-lendingmasstoprovideashearingdeformationof to the vertical using its bilateral statocysts and visual receptors,
theunderlyingciliaryprocessestosensepositionandacceleration andcanactuallymoveagainsttheforceofgravityusingasticky
withrespecttogravity. excretion.Weselectedthelandsnailforamonth-longstudyon
The mechanoreceptors provide the neural code to the reflex an unmanned orbiting satellite for many reasons, such as their
mechanisms that control balance and equilibrium and restore small size permitting a sufficient sample size given our volume
the organism to its appropriate posture and orientation. The limit,snailsarehardyandcanremainmetabolicallyactiveunder
first vertebrate ear was in essence a graviceptive statocyst confinedconditionsforthedurationofthemission,snailsdonot
(Budelmann, 1988), and only later in evolution did angular require elaborate life support systems, recordings can be made
acceleration sensation appear as the animal increased its directly from the sensory receptors themselves (Balaban et al.,
locomotormobilityanddevelopedaflexibleneck(Strakaetal., 2011; Popova and Boyle, 2015), and importantly certain snail
2014). behaviorsandtheirunderlyingcellularcircuitsarewelldescribed
In vertebrates the vestibular-induced compensatory action (Balaban,2002).Inthepresentstudysnailsspent30daysunder
is both tonic and dynamic and distributed mainly to the conditionsofweightlessnessanddarkness,therebyremovingits
motor circuits controlling the extensor, or antigravity, muscles normalcuesofthevertical.UnderreturntoEarththepostflight
(Wilson and Jones, 1979). In the absence of gravity and thus snailswerecomparedtofourseparatecontrolgroupstoidentify
an opposing force, even as brief as 5–11 days, astronauts lose theadaptivechangesatthebehavioral,structural,molecular,and
about 20% muscle mass (Fitts et al., 2001; Demontis et al., neurophysiological levels. Based on the present results we also
2017). The changes observed on the skeletomotor system by recalculatedourpreviousFoton-M3datatoconfirmthefindings
spaceflight are largely predicted by the mechanical unloading in separate missions and establish a time course of response
of the body mass: a large skeletal frame to manage muscle readaptationorrecoveryoffunctionafteraspaceflight.
contractionsaboutjointsisnolongerneededandmuscleatrophy
and osteopenia occur. This same causality might predict a MATERIALS AND METHODS
comparabledeteriorationofvestibularmechanosensoryfunction
Creating Persistent Conditions for
by space flight: no signal and thus no gain in the system.
Surprisingly, despite the permanence of gravity during the Microgravity
evolutionary courses of vertebrates and invertebrates in an The 2013 Bion-M1 space project was a 30-day orbital
otherwisechangingenvironment,themechanosensorystructures researchmissionoperatedbytheRussianAcademyofSciences,
do not progressively degenerate, at least not in the short term. launchedon19thofApril(2013)fromBaikonurCosmodrome,
Extraordinarily challenging recordings taken during spaceflight Kazakhstan,andlandedon19thofMaynearOrenburg,Russia.
from bullfrog otolith afferents by Bracchi et al. (1975) and The satellite was pressurized and contained full life support
Gualtierotti (1977) and vestibular neurons and ocular gaze in systems to maintain safe temperature, oxygen, and carbon
alert monkeys by Kozlovskaya and her colleagues (reviewed in dioxide levels for a wide variety of species. The satellite is
Cohen et al., 2005) were interpreted as showing an increased under Earth’s gravitational pull and is in a state of free fall
sensitivity in measured responses, at least in the early periods or microgravity (µG), and thus the objects within the satellite
ofthemissions.Otolithafferentsintheteleosttoadfishexhibited appear to be weightless. Upon return to Earth, the snails were
aprofoundhypersensitivitywhentestedtoinertialaccelerations airlifted from the landing site by helicopter to the Orenburg
upon return to Earth which recovered back to normal after airport,flownbyairplanetoMoscow,andtransportedbyvanto
severaldays(Boyleetal.,2001).Amorerecentstudyinastronauts thelaboratory,arrivingwithin13hafterlanding.
exposed to long-term space missions aboard the International
SpaceStationhaveshownadeceasedotolith-mediatedresponses Snail Populations
elicitedbycentrifugationafter6monthsofspaceflightwhichalso Experimental procedures were in compliance with the Guide
fullyrecoveredwithin 9daysafterreturn(Hallgrenetal.,2016). for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals published by the
∼
Theresultsinvertebratesexposedtospacemissionsindicatethe National Institutes of Health, and the Ethical Committee of
importance of the duration of exposure to space and the time the Institute of Higher Nervous Activity and Neurophysiology
frameinwhichmeasuresaretaken. of Russian Academy of Sciences approved the protocol. Land
On Earth the orientation of the gravitational acceleration snails,Helix lucorumL.,servedasexperimentalsubjectsinthis
defines the vertical, and although the gravitational vertical is study. Snails were collected in vineyards of Crimea, kept in
terraria, and fed on cabbage leaves in humid air conditions to
Abbreviations:PF,BIONM-1postflightgroupofsnails;NV,Naïvegroupofsnails; prevent aestivation (a prolonged rest in hot and dry periods
ST, Starvation control group of snails; DK, Dark control group of snails; OL, wherethesnailcoversitsshellopeningwithaspecialsecretion).
Overloadcontrolgroupofsnails;KW,Kruskal-wallistestofthenullofequality Experimentalanimalswereassignedto5separategroupsbased
ofall5groups;DBH,Dunn’smethodofpost-hocpairwisetests,p-valuesafter
on experimental condition (see Table1). The prime group was
Benjamini-HochbergadjustmentformultiplecomparisonsagainstthePFgroup;
thepopulationofpostflightsnails(PF,n 15)exposedtoµGfor
CI,Confidenceinterval;n.s.,Non-significant;SEM,Scanningelectronmicroscopy;
=
PCA,Principalcomponentanalysis;FPKM,Fragmentsperkilobasemillion. 30daysontheBion-M1orbitalsatellite.PFsnailswerehoused
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 2 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
TABLE1|Samplepopulationofsnails. stereotypical behavior was recorded for later analysis using a
general purpose digital camera at 30 fps. To provide a double
PF OL DK ST NV
blindcontrolanalysisthefilenamesofthePF,ST,andNVgroups
were encrypted. Three of the authors (M. R., T. K., and A.
N (re:weight) 15(6 9) 21(10 11) 20 17(4 13) 15
= + + + Z.) independently split video timelines for each snail to fit the
Snailweight,gm 8–10(6) 3–7(11) 18–28 8–10(4) 20–25
gravitaxis phases as described in the previous report (Balaban
20–25(9) 15–20(10) 20–25(13)
etal.,2011).Thethreeanalyzersthenmet,reevaluatedtheirtables
Temperature
+ + + + + oflatencies,andmadescreenshotsforeveryphaseofeachsnail’s
Fooddeprivation
+ + + + response. A difference in response latencies of >5s between
andcongestion
the 3 datasets was found in about 3% of measures, thereby
Nolightcycle
+ + + triggering a discussion of the merits of each measure until the
Overloading
+ + bestmeasurewasdetermined.Theother2experimentalgroups,
µGexposure
+ DKandOL,wereinvestigatedroughlyayearlaterandadouble
Fiveexperimentalgroups:PF,postflightBion-M1;OL,overloadsnailssubjectedtobrief blindprocedurewasdeemednotpertinentinthiscase.
hyper-gravitycentrifugationbeforetesting;DK,snailshousedinflighthabitatindarklikePF
Tentacle withdrawal reaction was measured as the length of
snails;ST,starvationsnailssubjectedtothesamefoodandwatersourcesandcongestion
asPFsnails;andNV,naïvesnailshousedinthestandardlabterrarium.Samplenumber eachtentacle,firstinpixelsusingImageJandthencalculatedand
(N )isgivenforthetotalnumberwithineachgroup,andwhereappropriatethesnails analyzed as a percentage of full tentacle length (corresponding
=
arepartitionedintoeitherasmallbodyweightorlargebodyweight(parentheses).Pluses to T0 phase of gravitaxis response). The angle in degrees
correspondtotheconditionsgivenintheleftmostcolumninwhichthesnailsineachgroup
between tentacles was measured in ImageJ for every phase of
aresubjected.
gravitaxis. Accuracy of ImageJ measurements from screenshots
wasevaluatedbymeandifferencebetweenresultsof3researchers
inthedarkduringthemissionandthusnoorientationcuesfrom (N. A., A. V., and Y. P.), and the data for 3 randomly chosen
a light source were available. Four ground-based asynchronous animalsfromPFgroupand3fromanyofcontrolgroupswere
groupsweredesignedforcomparisontothePFsnails.ANaïve used.Fortentaclelengthitwas6%errorofabsolutevalues,and
group(NV,n 15)ofsnailssurvivedfor30daysundernormal 4% for inter-tentacle angle measurement. All time parameters
=
conditions(Light:Darkcyclewas12:12andwaterandfoodwere were measured with accuracy of 1s by record timeline on
available ad libitum) in a lab terrarium having large spatial screenshots.
dimensions.AStarvationgroup(ST,n 17)survivedfor30days
=
attheInstituteofBiomedicalProblems(IMBP,Moscow)facilities SEM of Inertial Mass
asasynchronouscontrolsubjectsunderconditionsmoreclosely Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM) analysis was made on
similartothePFgroup,suchasacongestedhabitat,nofoodor statocysts from three groups of snails. The statocysts were
water except a bottom layer of wet paper, a fixed temperature, extracted after the experimental session, frozen dry and stored
but a normal light/dark cycle. The third control consisted of at 80 C. Before SEM imaging statocysts were fixed by cold
◦
−
snailsalsomimickingthePFgroup:a30-daysurvivalinaflight absolute ethanol for 12h, rinsed in distilled water, and placed
habitatundercomparableconditions,butinthedark(DKgroup, ontocarbontapeinadropofwater.Thestatocystwasdissected
n 20).Lastly,lastgroupwasDKsnailsexposedtoanapplied underadissectingmicroscopetovisualizetheinertialmassusing
=
short(2s)duration10Gacceleration;althoughthisstimulusdoes fineneurosurgeryforceps.Afterremovalofoverlyingstructures,
not simulate all of the parameters of landing of the Bion-M1 thestatoconiapreparationswereleftforfewminutestodesiccate.
satelliteuponitsreturntoEarth,itdoespresentaparadigmofan ThepreparedsampleswerethenplacedoncarbontapeforSEM
abrupttransitionfromalowergravityleveltoahigherone.We andputhorizontallyonthestageofthemicroscope(EVOLS10,
termedthisgroupagravityoverloading(OL,n 21).Weight- CarlZeiss,Germany)forbackscatteredelectrons(BSE)imaging
=
controlled snails of this OL group lived in conditions designed underlowvacuum(50–70Pa)andacceleratingvoltageof22kV
to resemble the PF group except the 30-day exposure to µG. (LaB6cathode).Digitalimageswerecapturedintiffformatwith
After30daysofthemockflighttheOLsnailswerecentrifugedin resolution3,024 2,406pixels.
×
individualcounterbalancedcontainersusingaBeckmanAllegra
X-15R(220RPM,containerradius19.2cm,2son10Ginmanual Total RNA Preparation and cDNA Library
modewithslowestpossibleaccelerationspeed).Thisprocedure Construction for NGS
neitherstoppedthecrawlingbehaviorofsnailsnorharmedthem Statocystsoftwogroups,PF-eandST(n 4 4),werefrozen
in any way by visual observation. Centrifugation of OL snails 80 CinmicroRNAbufferforsequencin = g.C + ellularRNAfrom
◦
wasperformedatthesametimeofdayastheBion-M1landing, − statocyst samples was prepared by the guanidine thiocyanate
followedbya12-hdelayofthebehavioralexperiments,tomimic method described by Chomczynski and Sacchi (1987). RNA
theconditionsandsamecircadiantimeasthePFgroup. for cDNA synthesis was treated with DNaseI (Boehringer,
Mannheim, Germany) for 30min at 37 C followed by phenol:
◦
Behavioral Studies chloroformextractionandethanolprecipitation.
Gravitaxis reaction to a 90 head down pitch from horizontal Total RNA samples were analyzed using Agilent 2100
◦
was tested in a previously described apparatus (Balaban et al., BioanalyzertoconfirmRNAisolationpurityandabsenceofRNA
2011) following the same protocol, and full course of this degradation.Thepeakof28SrRNAisinvisibleinsomespecies
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 3 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
ofsnailsbecausetheir28SrRNAconsistsoftwoseparatepieces addedanearlierobtainedHelixneuraltranscriptomeassembly.
held together by ribosome proteins, and after purification each This “multimerged” assembly gave 95.5% correct orthology
halfof28SrRNAhasthesamelengthas18SrRNA,so28Speak genes.
merges with 18S peak. According to this, we checked only 18S Afterobtainingthetranscriptomereference,wemustobtain
peakintegritytoestimatetotalRNAquality. expression genes level and distinguish important genes. First,
Reverse transcription of RNA samples was performed using we aligned with BWA MEM v. 0.7.5a-r405 each sample
oligo-dT(M1) primer and SuperScriptR III Enzyme Mix, and to our assembly-reference. Another aligner software (bowtie,
(cid:13)
secondstrandofcDNAwascreatedwithMintcDNAsynthesis bowtie2, tophat) showed worse results (approximately 70%
kit (Evrogen). Then we amplified cDNA samples for 27 cycles of aligned reads) and wasn’t used for further transcriptome
in the T100 thermal cycler (Bio-Rad) with universal primer analisys. The averaged percent of aligned reads were 93.7%
M1. Concentration of amplified cDNA was measured using (minimum 91.07%, maximum 95.47% reads). Next, we
− −
NanoDrop 2000 spectrophotometer. cDNA libraries were then computed FPKM values for ST group (“control” samples) and
prepared using Ion Plus Fragment library Kit (Ion Torrent, PF-e group (“experiment” samples) by CuffDiff software and
Life Technologies) following manufacturer’s protocols. cDNA selectedsignificantdifferentialexpressedgenes(3546geneswith
librarieswerepurifiedusingMagneticBeadCleanupModule(Ion p<0.05).
Torrent,LifeTechnologies).
The quality of each prepared cDNA library was evaluated Electrophysiological Studies
usingQubitR 2.0Fluorometer(withQubitR dsDNAHSAssay After the behavioral test was concluded (starting at 14–15h
(cid:13) (cid:13)
Kit) and Agilent 2100 Bioanalyzer (with High Sensitivity DNA afterlanding),thesnailwasanesthetizedbyinjectionofice-cold
chipandAgilentHighSensitivityDNAKit).Inoursamples,the isotonicMgCl solution( 15%ofbodyweight)anditsnervous
2
∼
amountofshortcDNAfragmentswithlengthof25–160bpdid systemwasisolatedandpreparedforelectrophysiologicalstudies
notexceed10%. of the statocyst response to tilt mimicking the “head down”
During the next step, clonal amplification was performed and the “tail down” behavioral conditions. The whole nerve
usingIonPITM TemplateOT2200Kitv3andIonOneTouchTM recording techniques from the statocyst nerve, n. vestibularis,
2system(LifeTechnologies)inaccordancewithmanufacturer’s were made during the time window of 15–26h after landing.
recommendations. After amplification, the samples were Theexperimentaldesignanddataanalysiswereconductedina
centrifuged, and precipitates were resuspended in bidistilled comparable fashion to our previous Foton-M3 study (Balaban
waterandstoredat 4 Cfor14–18h. etal.,2011).Inbrief,thecentralganglionicringwasdissectedfree
◦
+
SequencingwasperformedusingIonPITMSequencing200Kit fromtheanesthetizedanimalandpinnedtoasilicone-elastomer
v3andIonPITM Chipv2onIonProtonTM sequencer.Onechip (Sylgard)-coated dish. The vestibular nerve was identified, its
containedfourlibrariestaggedwithdifferentbarcodes. surrounding connective tissue was removed, and it was placed
acrossaVaselinebridgethatisolatedthenerveinonechamber
Transcriptome Analysis of Statocysts from the nerve, statocyst, and surrounding pedal ganglion in
First we made de novo assembly of H. lucorum statocyst the other chamber. Each chamber contained a saline solution,
transcriptome using the TRINITY v.2.4.0 (32G memory, 60 a Ag/AgCl wire, and the signals from the vestibular nerve
threads,min_contig_length 200),SPAdesv.3.10.0(-iontorrent were differentially amplified and recorded. The reflex arc from
=
flag,60threads)andVelvet/Oases(v.1.2.10,optimalk-merlength the statocyst nerve to command neurons of the defensive
wasestimatedbybrute-forcemethodandequal111,-scaffolding behavior was tested using conventional intracellular recordings
and -read_trkg flags was enabled) programs for assembling incombinationwithnervestimulation,singlepulse3mswidth,
transcriptome. For assessment programs quality, we have 0.8–2.1V,usingtheisolatedstimulationhead.
computedforeachprogramN50valuesandmaximaltranscript We used the spike sorting by template interactive script
length (TRINITY N50—321 Maximal Trans. Len.—2,545 bp; provided in Spike2v.7 (Cambridge Electronic Design,
SPAdesN50—558MaximalTrans.Len.—4,813bp;OasesN50— Cambridge, UK) for the single unit analysis. Each record
453 Maximal Trans. Len.—1,262 bp). Next, all assemblies were wasimportedtoSpike2andthecursorsselectedthekeyimpulse
merged to one FASTA-file. Transcripts from this file were epochsintimewiththehelpofauxiliarychanneldisplayingthe
clustered by homology level. Two transcripts have one cluster, movementoftheplatform.Spiketemplatesweretypicallymade
if the homology level is more than 90%. The clustering was fromthefirstrunthroughtherecord,andbythesecondrunall
accomplished by CD-HIT v.4.6 program. Totally from four the spikes were sorted. First and second principal components
differentassembleswereformed66355clusters.Afterclustering, were used to visualize clouds of single units. These clouds of
thelongesttranscriptswereextractedfromeachclusterandwrote single units were checked with PCA to not intersect. Usually
intonewmulti-FASTAfile.1788966sequencesinfinalassemble default parameters and time window of spike length work well
were obtained. For each sequence in this assembly was found andgenerate5–13additionalchannelsofsingleunitactivity.
openreadingframebyTransdecoder.
The quality of this combined assembly was estimated by Statistical Analysis
BUSCO v. 2.0.1 program. It computes the percent of correctly StatisticalanalysiswasdoneinRsoftwareusingcustomwritten
assembled orthology genes in the input file. Our combined scripts for exploratory statistics and one-way comparison of
assemblygave50%correctorthologygenes.Forbetterqualitywe multiple groups. We performed automated analysis of all data
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 4 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
by R Markdown script, which generated statistical reports in 0.011forPF-OLcomparison;mean 95%CI).Duetothenature
±
doc format, where different statistical approaches were used to of this measured parameter, there are few extreme outliers in
the same data. The script, raw data, and statistical reports are thedataset(q.v.SupplementaryMaterials).Robustmethodsare
uploadedtoOpenScienceFrameworkplatformtomakemaximal recommendedtodealwithsuchsamplestoimprovethepower
amount of scientific data open (https://osf.io/v5brf/). For the ofstatistics,andindeedtheyreturnp 0.001inKWandDBH
≤
behavioralpartofthisstudywereportresultsofKruskal-Wallis tests,therebyprovidingstrongsupportforashorterphaseT0in
test (KW) to find the difference between the 5 groups as a PFthanintheotherfourcontrolgroupsofsnails.Nostatistical
default method, because homogeneity of variances assumption differences of T0 latency were found between the four control
mostly fails on our unfiltered data. Dunn’s procedure for post- groups, even with the application of powerful randomization
hoc pairwise tests against the PF group was used, and the methodsonfiltereddatasets.
reported p-valuesareafterBenjamini-Hochbergadjustment for A comparison of phase T1 latency between PF to the
multiple comparisons (DBH). Alpha 0.05 was accepted as level four control groups shows no statistically significant difference
ofsignificancebydefault,butexactp-valuesaremostlyreported between them (KW p 0.195). There are few outliers in the
=
here. Supplementary materials at Open Science Framework dataset, so we applied robust statistics as well, which resulted
contain additional classical statistical inference also as a result onlyinmarginalsignificance(KWp 0.039,DBHp 0.01
adj
= =
of the randomization methods (Bayesian probability and 95% for PF-ST only). A similar result was found with T1 duration
confidenceintervals,PERMANOVA)androbusttools(ANOVA (T1latency–T0latency),withaninsignificantdifferencebetween
on 20% trimmed means and analysis of datasets with Tukey’s groups(KWp 0.106)inunfiltereddatasetandsignificantfor
=
outliersfilteredout),allowingcomprehensiveanalysisofthedata. onlytwocontrolgroupsifTukey’soutlierswerefilteredout(KW
CorrelationanalysisisprovidedasSpearman’srankstatistics,and p 0.02, DBH p 0.003 for PF-ST and p 0.023 for
adj adj
= = =
correlationmatriceswerevisualizedbycorrplotRpackage. PF-DK).
With respect to phase T2 latency a similar result was
RESULTS observed.ThecomparisonofthisphasebetweenPFtothefour
controlgroupsagainshowednostatisticallysignificantdifference
Early Phases of Gravitaxis Reaction
between them (KW p 0.223). There are a few outliers in
=
Whentheplatformuponwhichthesnailisattachedissuddenly the dataset, so we used robust statistics here as well, which
pitchedfromhorizontaltovertical,thesnaildisplaysafear-like resulted in only marginal significance (KW p 0.046, DBH
=
reactionbyfullyorpartiallywithdrawingitstentacles(designed revealsnosignificantp -values).Nosignificantdifferencesfor
adj
phase 0; Figure1A). This reaction (latency of withdrawal is T2 duration, and also for the later phases T3 and T4 latency
<1s)isbelievedmediatedbythegravi-sensingstatocystorgan,
and duration, were found or at best a marginal one between
the snail’s equivalent to a vertebrate’s vestibular otolith organ. twogroupsincomparisononly(q.v.SupplementaryMaterialsfor
Therefore, the differences in magnitude and time (duration) of details).
the resulting tentacle elongation phase likely reveal changes in
reaction of the snail’s statocyst. We define the phase of fast
Tentacles Withdrawal during Gravitaxis
elongation of tentacles before the snail starts to turn its body
as the T0 phase of gravitaxis (Figure1A). Our previous report Reaction
(Balaban et al., 2011) did not follow this convention, and thus Changes of tentacle length during the gravitaxis behavior are
the behavior seen in phase T0 of Figure2A does not correctly shown in Figure2A. No significant asymmetry in tentacle
alignwithourcurrentconventionbecausethelengthoftentacles withdrawal reaction was found in any group (p 0.483,
=
werenotfullyextended.AttheendofT0phasetherapidtentacle dependentt-test),andthusdataforleftandrighttentacleswere
elongationiscompleteandtheblackeyesontheirtipsareclearly averaged.Acomparisonofphase0tentaclewithdrawalreaction
recognizableinmostoftherecords,bothofwhichoccurbefore (Figure2B) of the four control groups to the PF group reveals
theheadactuallystartstomove.SnailsoftenstartturningtoT1 thatPFsnailsareretractingtheirtentaclestoalesserdegreethan
phaseimmediatelyaftersomeamountof“hesitation”orscanning thesnailsineachcontrolgroup(KWp 0.009,DBHp <0.035
adj
=
the space around them by moving the head from side to side. for3of4controlgroups,andinsignificantp 0.1forPF-ST
adj
=
Therewasnosignificantdifferencebetweengroupsinthecount comparison).
of scanning movements (p 0.114 by Fisher’s Exact Test with The later dynamics of the tentacle lengths show more
=
Monte-Carlosimulatedp-valuebasedon99999replicates);82of complicateddifferencesbetweenthegroups.Afterarelativelyfast
88(93%)snailsofallgroupsturnedthebodytopositionthehead elongationofthetentaclesduringphaseT0(8–15s),thesnailsin
abovetheshellinT2phase. allgroupsslowlyelongatedtheirtentacles 10–30%moreduring
∼
T1phase(Figure2A).AfterphaseT1tentaclelengthreacheda
Temporal Parameters (Latencies and
plateau in all control groups, with a higher length seen in OL
Durations) of Gravitaxis Phases snailsthanintheNV,ST,andDKsnails(insignificantlyduring
The dynamics of gravitaxis behavior are shown in Figure1. A T1-T2, at tendency level (p < 0.1) at T3, and significantly for
comparisonofphaseT0durationbetweenthepostflight(PF)to T4(againstallgroupsincludingPF:KWp 0.02,DBHp
adjmax
=
thefourcontrolgroupsrevealsstatisticallysignificantshortening 0.049;Figure2C).ThetentaclelengthofPFsnailsduringthe
(panel C) of T0 in PF snails (KW p < 0.006, DBH p = lategravitaxisphasesshoweddifferentdynamics(Figure2A).At
adjmax
=
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 5 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
FIGURE1|Temporalparametersofsnailgravitaxisreaction.(A)Designationof6gravitaxisphasesbasedonstereotypicbehaviorofsnails.(B)Start,stop,and
durationofthe6gravitaxisphases(insec)inthe5separatesnailgroups(bars, StandardErroroftheMean).(C)LatencyofT0phase(tentacleselongation)inall
±
snailgroups,meanand95%CI.
T1 it reached a maximum ( 130% of T0, close to OL group controldatasettentaclelengthsshowweaknegativecorrelations
∼
value), and then gradually declined over time to T0 length at with temporal parameters (most pronounced and significant
∼
theendofT4phase.ThesamedatainFigure2Aarenormalized for T0 latency and length, Figure3A). For the PF group no
in Figure2D for tentacle length at phase T1 as 100%, but the such a correlation was found (Figure3B). Latencies and inter-
proceduredidnotchangethedirectionofobservedeffects. tentacleanglesshowweaknegativecorrelationsinbothPFand
controlgroups.InPFgrouptentaclelengthsshowweakpositive
Inter-Tentacle Angle during Gravitaxis
correlationswithinter-tentacleangle(althoughinsignificantwith
Reaction the sample size used), in contrast to control dataset showing
The dynamics of the angle between tentacles was measured in no such correlation. Positive correlation of snail weight with
certainphasesofgravitaxisreactionandareshowninFigureS1A. durationof“ascending”phasesT2andT3ismorepronounced
Nosignificantdifferencesbetweengroupswerefoundexceptthe in PF group then in control, also as negative correlation with
deltaangle(T0-0)difference,whichissignificantforPF-NVand durationofT1.
OL-NVcomparisons(KWp 0.013,DBHp 0.029andp
adj adj
= = Foton-M3 Behavioral Data Reanalysis
0.019; Figure S1B). More powerful statistical methods were
= appliedbutfailedtorevealanyadditionaldifferencesamongthe The behavioral data from a 2007 Foton-M3 12-day orbital
snailgroups(q.v.SupplementaryMaterials). satellite mission were analyzed before for latency of gravitaxis
phases (Balaban et al., 2011), but the small sample size did not
Correlation Analysis of Gravitaxis Reaction allow us to make any statistically supported conclusions. The
A correlation analysis was made between the merged datasets designofFoton-M3experimentwasslightlydifferent:gravitaxis
ofthefourcontrolgroupsandthePFdataset(Figure3).Phase responses only up to phase T2 were recorded, and the same
T1-T4 latencies and durations are positively correlated among preflight snails were used as control group. Here we reanalyze
themselves in both PF and joined control group of snails, as the Foton-M3 behavioral records following the same workflow
wellastentaclelength,and,toalesseramount,theinter-tentacle as Bion-M1 data to test the confidence of our main findings
angles.InthePFgroupcorrelationsbetweeninter-tentacleangles (Figure S2). The latency of T0 phase of Foton-M3 postflight
ofearlyandlatephasesishigherthanincontrols.Delta(T0-0) group had a tendency to be shorter than in their preflight
inter-tentacleangleisweaklypositivelycorrelatedwithtentacle control measures (median 9.5 vs. 12.5s, n 10, p 0.112
= =
lengthincontrolsbutnotinthePFgroup.InPFgroupdelta(T0- in dependent t-test). Tentacle withdrawal reaction in postflight
0)iscorrelatedwithlatency,butnosuchacorrelationwasseen group of snails was weaker than in the same snails in preflight
inthemergedcontrol.Asexpected,thenumberofheadscanning tests(median60.45vs.34%ofT0length,p 0.002independent
=
movementsispositivelycorrelatedwithlatencyforallphases.In t-test), and showed no difference with the control in late
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 6 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
FIGURE2|Tentacleslengthduringsnailgravitaxis.(A)Tentacleslengthduringallgravitaxisphases,normalizedforT0 100%.Tentacleslengthin0(B)andT4(C)
=
gravitaxisphases,meanand95%CI.(D)Tentacleslengthduringallgravitaxisphases,normalizedforT1 100%.
=
FIGURE3|Correlationmatricesofparametersfor(A)joinedcontrolsand(B)PFgroup.Cellswithboldbordersaresignificant(p<0.05),belowmaindiagonalthe
Spearman’srhovaluesareshown.
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 7 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
phases (Figure S2B). Differences in the inter-tentacle angles in Background Statocyst Activity
Foton-M3 data (Figure S2C) are close to significance level: for InBion-M1postflightandthefourcontrolgroupswerecorded
postflight group phase 0 and T0 angles were smaller, than for background statocyst activity and induced responses to tilts in
preflight control (p 0.025 and p 0.067 correspondingly different directions. Background firing rate in preparations of
= =
in dependent t-test); the delta (T0-0) angle was higher in differentgroupswasnotstatisticallydifferent,althoughOLand
postflight group (p 0.051 in dependent t-test). Conclusively, especially DK preparations had increased level of background
=
Foton-M3 data reanalysis revealed the differences in postflight activity(spikespersecond,PF:6.46 0.7,OL:8.14 0.89,DK:
± ±
2007 group in the same direction as in Bion-M1 postflight 10.25 1.0,ST:6.6 0.55,NV:6.94 1.1;DBHallagainstPFn.
± ± ±
group. s.,minimalp 0.072forPF-DKcomparison,morestatistics
adj
=
areavailableasSupplementaryMaterials).
Statoconia Structure
Electrophysiological Studies: Technical
The surface structure of the statoconia mass from groups PF,
Controls
OLandSTwasimagedbySEMtoexaminetheroleofpossible
Many factors can affect the recorded responses of statocysts,
statoconia growth after 30-day exposure to µG conditions
and thus we attempted to control as many of them as possible
(Figure4). Although the sample size is small (one statocyst
to reveal the effect of microgravity exposure on the vestibular
in each group), no crustations or “flake-like” structures were
system. Short-term plasticity (habituation or sensitization)
observedinthestatoconiaofthePFsamplethatmightindicate
duringanexperimentcanaffectneuralresponses,soourprotocol
a deposition of calcium carbonate; no differences were found
controlled it by a fixed inter-stimulus interval and a fixed
in either statoconia shape or surface structure between groups.
sequence of stimuli, where the first four tilts were excluded
ThestatoconiaareaswerecalculatedfromSEMimagesinImageJ
from the analysis. Additional experiments were made to study
ROImanager,andatracingtoolwithminimalmanualcorrection
the stability of nerve responses to a long sequence of stimuli
selectedeachregion.Nosignificantdifferencewasfoundbetween
(exhaustivecontrol,FigureS3),andtoasequencewithareversed
groups(µm2,PF:218.9 12.24,OL:196.6 12.59,ST:235.5
± ± ± orderofstimuli(FigureS4).Thereisalsothepossibilityoflong-
14.8,n.s.p 0.43inDBHpairwisecomparisonsagainstPF
adj ≥ termcircadianchangesofresponses,asitwasshownforthesnail
group).
lipsensorynerve(Vossetal.,1997);thisfactormightinfluence
theresultsbecausetherecordingsofPFsnailscommencedafter
Transcriptome Analysis of Statocysts theirarrivaltothelabatnight.Toexcludesuchapossibilitywe
We allocated 3,544 transcripts with a significant difference provideadditionalexperimentswithourisolatedCNS-statocysts
betweenFPKMvaluesinthecontrol(ST)andexperiment(PF- preparations(FigureS5).Resultsofthesetechnicalcontrolsallow
e)groups.ThesetranscriptswereannotatedbyBLASThomology ustoanalyzethedataacquiredbythemainprotocol.
finding.NPdatabasewasusedforalignment.Therewere2,288
Postflight Increase of Statocyst Response
proteinsannotated.Itisusefultonotethatmanytranscriptshave
similar annotation. For example, Cd-specific metallothionein to Vestibular Stimulation
gene was found 373 times. Possible explanations may be a Averagedstatocystresponsestostimuliforallgroupsareshown
clustering of similar genes or a very aggressive PCR. Fifty of in Figure7. The number of spikes in the range (1.4–3.2) s in
themostsignificantdifferentialexpressiongenes(p<0.05)are responsetohead-downtilt(c1)issignificantlygreaterinPFsnails
listedinTableS1andthemostinterestingofthemareshownon thanthatinothersnails(PF:80.4 4.44,OL:52.58 3.42,DK:
± ±
the heatmap diagram of Figure5. Among the most significant 61.85 4.55,ST:68.68 3.26,NV:65.21 5.05;DBHallagainst
± ± ±
differentiallyexpressedgenesaretheneuronalspecificprecursors PF p adj 0.026 after removing of 3 outliers in ST group). The
≤
ofneuropeptides,neurotransmitterreceptorsubunits,andother number of spikes in the range (1.7–2.0) s in response to tilt in
genes involved in cell signaling. This result of transcriptome direction tail down (c3) is significantly more in group PF than
analysis unambiguously identified the statocyst itself as the site in other groups (PF: 18.3 1.24, OL: 13.05 0.83, DK: 14.31
± ±
ofneuralplasticityduringtheprocessofreadaptationtonormal 1.47, ST: 13.88 0.96, NV: 14.29 0.87; DBH all against
± ± ±
gravity after spaceflight. Raw data were deposited at NCBI PF p adj 0.045). Both adjusted p-values are close to marginal
≤
Bioproject,accessionnumberPRJNA400816. value, so these results must be viewed with caution. Control
groups show no homogeneity: preparations of two groups with
morecontrolledfactors,OLandDK,respondedwithsmallergain
Electrophysiological Study of Statocyst
(numberofspikesafterthetilt,normalizedtobackgroundfiring
Reflex Arc
rate)thanpreparationsofNVandSTgroups,Figures7C,E(for
In naïve snails we studied the reflex arc from statocyst c1OL:3.93 0.3,DK:3.56 0.21,ST:5.93 0.6NV:5.82
± ± ± ±
sensoryneuronstocommandandmotoneuronsforadefensive 0.75,DBHp 0.007).
adj
≤
withdrawal behavior. Brief and weak electric shocks, delivered
to statocyst nerve, exert an excitatory postsynaptic potential Adaptation to Microgravity
(EPSP)ortriggersanactionpotentialinPa2andPa28neurons The30-dayexposuretoµGconditionsintheBion-M1mission,
(Figure6).TheEPSPshapeanditslatencysuggestapolysynaptic aswellastheshorter12-daydurationoftheFoton-M3mission,
mechanismviaunidentifiedinterneurons. significantly affected the responses of the PF snails. Postflight
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 8 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
FIGURE4|SEMimagesofstatoconia.(A–C),Lowmagnificationviewusedforareacalculations;(D–F),Maximalmagnificationoftypicalstatoconia.Columns
representstatoconiapreparationsfromdifferentgroups:(A,D),PFgroup;(B,E),OLgroup;(C,F),STgroup.
FIGURE5|TheheatmapforFPKMvalueofmostsignificantdifferentialexpressiongenes.
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 9 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
individuallytotheOLsnailstorevealtheprocessofreadaptation
of statocyst function. The statocyst response of PF-e subgroup
was significantly larger than that of PF-l subgroup and most
OL snails (Figure9). Responses to tilt in the range (0.5–1.7) s
were significantly larger in the two analyzed directions in PF-e
subgroup(forc1PF-e:54.67 4.16,PF-l:36.75 7.11,OL:31
± ± ±
2.13,DBHpairwisecomparisonagainstPF-ep 0.073(n.s.—
adj
=
butp 0.03withTukeypost-hoctest)forPF-landp 0.002
adj adj
= =
forOL;forc3(PF-e:46.17 3.64,PF-l:29.75 2.29,OL:27.47
± ±
1.89,DBHpairwisecomparisonagainstPF-ep 0.038for
adj
± =
PF-landp 0.001forOL).
adj
=
The readaptation process in two different missions was
compared by similarly splitting the electrophysiological data of
Foton-M3bytimeofpreparationrecordingat20hafterlanding.
Onlytwopreparationswererecordedbeforethiscriticaltime,but
the overall picture is very similar to that obtained from Bion-
M1 dataset (Figure S6). Statistics for such a small sample may
benotreliable,buttherequiredconfidencelevelwasreachedfor
differencebetweenearlyandlatelyrecordedPF2007subgroups,
also as with control DK2007 group [range (1.3–2.2) s pairwise
comparisonagainstPF2007-e:54 2vs.32 4.9PF2007-l,p
adj
± ±
0.04,DK2007:21.88 3.11,p 0.003;Tukeypost-hoctest].
adj
= ± =
Activity of Vestibular Efferent Neurons
One of the possible mechanisms of the statocyst activity
modulationisbytuningthesensorycellsviathecentralvestibular
efferent fibers synapsing onto the statoreceptors. We were able
to distinguish the activity of statocyst efferent neurons in our
FIGURE6|Commandneuronsofdefensivebehaviorreceiveexcitatoryinput
n. vestibularis records by spike sorting of single units with
fromvestibularnerve.(A)Singleshock3ms,0.68V;(B)singleshock3ms,
invertedpolarityofspikes(i.e.,travelingincentrifugaldirection
1.5V.Stimulationofn.vestibularisexertsEPSP(A)oranactionpotential(B)in
ipsi-andcontralateralcommandneuronsfordefensivebehavior. tostatocyst).Apossibleefferentroleinvestibularmodulationwas
examinedbycomparingperi-stimuluscurvesofefferentactivity
in the different groups of snails (Figure10). Efferent activity
was found only in part of the preparations in any group, and
snails of both projects arrived at the lab at comparable times
in every case it was monotonous firing with OFF-responses to
(firstnerverecording 14hafterlanding),andthesameprotocol
∼ bursts of statocyst activity. No significant difference in efferent
wasusedinallpreparations.Asaresultwecancompareneural
activitybetweengroupswasfound[KWp 0.78( 4.9 1.9)
responses to identical tilt stimuli in the two postflight groups = − −−
s; KW p 0.14 (0.2–2.9) s]. Such a pattern of activity and
to check the dependence of statocyst adaptation to µG on the =
the lack of a significant correlation of it between the groups
durationofmission.Figure8showsthecomparisonofstatocyst
suggestalikelynegligibleinfluenceofvestibularefferentsonthe
tilt responses to mission duration. No statistically significant
backgroundandinducedactivityofstatocystinourpreparations.
differenceinnumberofspikesbetweenthetwopostflightgroups
WestudiedalsotheeffectoflightON-andOFF-stimuliinsemi-
wasfoundinpairwisecomparisons[totilt3,050msrange(1.1–
intactpreparationswithintacteyesandfoundnolighteffecton
2.9)sPF:70.15 3.84vs.PF2007:72.5 8.042,KWp 0.72;
± ± = activityofstatocystefferentsandsensorycells(FigureS7).
fortilt550msrange(0.2–1.4)sPF:52.59 2.73vs.PF2007:54
±
5.74,KWp 0.8],suggestingtheresponseadaptationtoµG
± = Effect of Tilt Direction on Statocyst
reachesaplateauatatimeshorterthan12days.
Response and Single Unit Analysis
Readaptation to Normal Gravity Responses to tilt in the direction of head down to horizon
Oncethesatelliteleavesorbititre-enterstheEarth’satmosphere. position (c1) were larger than any other vestibular stimuli in
At this point the organism experiences a hyper-gravity force preparations from all control groups and the PF group (see
untiltouchdown,about45minlater.Readaptationlikelybegins Figures S4, S8). The effect was more profound in the period
during the re-entry phase and determines how quickly the immediately after the stimulus end (tonic response), and more
organism recovers. The first and last nerve recordings of PF obvious on cumulative plots (Figure S9). Experiments using a
snails were made 14.75 and 26.13h after landing, respectively. reversed order of stimuli (to control for conditioning) showed
ThePFsnailsweresplitintoanearlyPF-e(<20hafterlanding) that there is some effect of the sequence (note the increased
and late PF-l (>20h after landing) subgroups, and compared responsetoc4directiononFigureS4);butevenifthestimulus
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 10 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
FIGURE7|Averagedstatocystsresponsestovestibularstimuli.(A)Sequenceofpresentedtilts.Upwarddisplacementoftheplatformcorrespondstohead-downtilt
oftheanimaltilt.(B,D),Peri-stimuluscurvesofaveragedresponsestostimuliintwooppositedirections.(C,E),Cumulativecurvesofresponsesforthesamestimuli,
normalizedtobackgroundfiringrate.*p<0.05.
FIGURE8|ComparisonofBion-M1andFoton-M3postflightgroupsrevealsanindependenceofmicrogravityadaptationonmissionduration.(A)Responsetoc1
stimuluswithduration3,050ms.(B)Responsetoc1stimuluswithduration550ms.FilledsymbolsrepresentPFsnailsandopensymbolsthecorrespondingcontrol
snails(seelegendbox).
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 11 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
FIGURE9|SplittingPFgroupbythetimeofrecordingsaftertouchdownrevealsthetimecourseofthere-adaptationprocess.Averagedstatocystsresponsesto
vestibularstimulioftheearly(PF-e)andlate(PF-l)togetherwiththeoverload(OL)controlsnailsaregivenineachplot.ThePF-esubgroupshowsthelargest
magnitudeofresponse.(A,C),Peri-stimuluscurvesofaveragedresponsestostimuliintwooppositedirections.(B,D),Cumulativecurvesofresponsesforthesame
stimuli,normalizedtobackgroundfiringrate.**p<0.01;***p<0.001.
in c1 direction was presented last in the sequence, it generated was found in these single units, so it cannot be the substrate
thelargerresponseofthestatocyst. of directional sensitivity we had found in net responses.
In µG conditions statoreceptors are “unloaded” in contrast Background firing rate of single units in PF-e group is
to normal gravity, and thus have less contact with the weight- similar to the one in OL group, but the responses are
lendingstatoconia.Ifanadaptationprocessoccurs,theincrease significantly larger (KW p < 0.001), Figure11D. Another
in sensitivity of statoreceptors may be expected. We analyzed analyzed single unit’s pattern was characterized by low or no
the tilt responses of whole nerve activity at single unit level, background firing rate in the horizontal position and phasic-
namely the presumed single statoreceptors in two snail groups, tonic responses to vestibular stimuli in only one direction
PF-e and OL. The activity of single statoreceptors may signify (Figure12). By the direction of its sensitivity the response
an activation (ON-responses) or inhibition (OFF-responses) likely originated from a frontally located statoreceptors for
to vestibular stimuli, and varying phasic or tonic behavior direction c1 Figures12A,C,D) and from a caudally located
might enrich the responses. All possible combinations of cells for c3 (Figure12B). These statoreceptors also showed
activity pattern were found in our recordings (Figure S10). dramatic difference between OL and PF-e groups, and no
First we plotted the averaged responses to different stimuli increased tonic activity for c1 direction. From single unit
for two single units with a maximal phasic response (in 5s) analysis only one explanation remains for increased responses
to either stimulus c1 or c3 (Figure11). These single units for direction c1, observed in all groups. As Helix statocyst
contributed 30% of the overall background firing level in contains 13 statoreceptors, the unpaired cell, located at the
∼
the statocyst nerve, but showed a very weak sensitivity to anterior pole of the statocyst, drives the increase in response
vestibular stimuli (ON- responses to any stimulus), suggesting to head down tilt (c1). This cell responds to c1 stimulus
they presumably represented ventrally located statoreceptors, and does not respond to any other stimulus presented
(Figures11A–C). No increased tonic activity to c1 stimulus (Figure13).
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 12 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
FIGURE10|Singleunitanalysisofstatocystefferentfiringrate.(A)Efferentactionpotentialstostatocystappearasinvertedspikesinourextracellularrecords.1—n.
vestibularisrecord,1′–spikeseventderivedfromtherecord1.Asterisksmarkinvertedspikes,whichanalyzedasseparatedchannel.(B)Extracellularrecordofactivity
oftheleftandrightstatocysts:1,n.vestibularissin.;2,n.vestibularisdex.;1aand2a,virtualchannelsderivedbyspikesortingofnerveactivity,representing
presumedefferentactivitytothecorrespondingstatocyst.Inthisexampleeachnervetransmitsspikesfromtwopresumedefferentcellsrevealedbyspikeshapeand
shownindifferentcolors.NotetheOFF-responsesinactivityofefferentstospontaneousburstsinstatocystactivity(markedbyasterisks)andtoburstselicitedbytilts
(trace3,60sbetweentilts).(C,D),Averagedperi-stimuluscurvesofefferentfiringratetostimulusof3,050msduration(C)andof550msduration(D).Tiltdurationis
givenbythegraybaratthebottomofeachplot.
DISCUSSION with gravity sensation were the most affected by the vestibular
perturbationstestedassoonasthesnailsreachedthelaboratory
Behavioral Studies
afterlanding.
Upon entry into orbit the satellite is in a constant free fall To distinguish µG-affected parameters, we made multiple
back toward Earth and the traveler feels weightless. The neural group analysis of variance comparisons for each variable (q.v.
gravity sensors that control normal balance and equilibrium Supplementary Materials). It reveals significant changes in the
are now forced to operate in a unique environment. The earlyphaseofgravitaxisreactionparametersinthepostflight(PF)
present experiments sought to identify the consequences of a group:thedegreeoftentacleswithdrawalattheinitialphase0was
30-day orbital mission on the behavioral performance of snails smaller(Figure2B),andfollowedbyshorterlatencyoftentacles
challenged by a vestibular perturbation after return to normal protraction(T0,Figure1C).Bothfindingswerereplicatedinthe
1G starting 14–15h after landing. To account for possible data from an earlier 12-day Foton-M3 mission (T0 latency at
environmental and habitat factors of unmanned spaceflights thetendencylevel,phase0withdrawalhighlysignificant;Figure
that can affect measured parameters of behavior other than S2). After the snail pivots to the head-up position (late T3-T4
those related to the state of weightlessness, we designed four phases),thelengthoftentaclesbecomesshorterinthePFgroup
control groups based on housing, food and water availability, incomparisonto3controlgroups(Figure2).Atthesametimein
and lighting, and included a landing-like simulation. In brief, thefourthcontrolgroup,termedstatocyst-affected“overloading”
we found that the behavioral phases most directly correlated (landingsimulation,OL),thetentaclelengthatT4issignificantly
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 13 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
FIGURE11|Singleunitanalysisofstatocystactivity.(A,D),Responsesofsingleunitshowedmaximalresponsetostimulusc1.(B,C),Responsesofaseparatesingle
unitshowedmaximalresponsetostimulusc3.
higher thanthat of the PF snails or any control snail, a finding OL) did show shorter T1-T4 latencies than PF group. For
thatpromotesaspeculationontheoppositeeffectofoverloading Foton-M3 data (with comparable snail size used), all available
(hypergravity) and unloading (µG) exposure on the functions latencies (up to T2) are shorter than in preflight controls,
controlledbysnailstatocysts. thus in agreement with the hypothesis that gravitaxis temporal
The cause of a lesser T2 latency in Foton-M3 postflight parameterswillchangeinanoppositefashionafterµGthanafter
groupincomparisontoBion-M1PFgroupmaybeattributedto hypergravity.NodifferencesinT4durationbetweenµGPFand
smallersnailsusedinFoton-M3project(3–8vs.8–25g,muscle controlgroupsofsnailswerefoundinthedataofBion-M1,also
mass/shellweightratioishigherforyoungsnails,allowingfaster inagreementwiththepreviousstudyofhypergravityinfluences
movements). We studied subgroups of young snails (3–8g) in and the assumption that the T4 phase may reflect more motor
OLcontrols,butnocorrelationofT2durationwithweightwas thanvestibularfunctioninsnails(PopovaandBoyle,2015).
found (q.v. Supplementary Data). For the gravitaxis reaction, A correlation analysis of Bion-M1 behavioral data found
the snails affected by prolonged µG exposure show stronger T1-T4 phase latencies and durations were positively correlated
correlationswithsnailweightthandocontrolsnails(Figure3), among themselves in both PF and joined control snails,
thussuggestingaprobableexplanationofashorterT2phasein suggesting a stability of gravitaxis speed during the entire
Foton-M3postflightsnails. T1-T4 sequence (“slow snails are always slow”). The tentacle
Snails belonging to the same genus of Helix (H. aspersa), length in phases T1-T4 in both PF and control snails showed
thecommongardensnail,wereexposedtoincreasedgravitation a positive inter-relation, suggesting the stability of withdrawal
by centrifugation for 16 and 32 days and showed an increased reaction during gravitaxis reaction (“afraid snails are always
latencyorslowingofT3phaseofgravitaxis(PopovaandBoyle, afraid”).Inter-tentacleanglesarealsopositivelycorrelatedamong
2015). In the data of Bion-M1 project opposite effects in PF themselvesduringtheentiregravitaxisreaction(0-T4),although
snailstothecontrolsnailswerenotseen.Thereisnoconsistency toalesserextentthantentaclelengthandtemporalparameters,
betweenthedifferentBion-M1controlgroupsinthisparameter, probably due to the transient nature of this parameter. The
although two groups with most controlled conditions (DK and tentaclelengthsatT0inthefourmergedcontrolgroupsshowed
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 14 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
FIGURE12|Singleunitanalysisofstatocystactivity.(A,C,D),Responsesofsingleunitshoweddirectionalphasicresponsetostimulusc1.(B),Responsesofa
separatesingleunitshoweddirectionalphasicresponsetostimulusc3.
weak negative correlations with temporal parameters, together to be correlated with speed of snail crawling (Davis, 2004;
withT0latencywithtentaclelengthatmanyphases(Figure3A). Davis-Berg,2012).Inourexperimentsinter-tentacleangleswere
Thisfindingmaybeinterpretedthatsnailsexhibitingmorefear measured from the screenshots of different phases of gravitaxis
(retracttentaclesshorter)completethegravitaxisreactionmore reaction, and the analysis revealed a tendency of the angle
slowly.ForPFsnailssuchacorrelationdisappears(Figure3B), to become narrower in late phases in all groups of Bion-M1
supposedlybecausethedisturbanceofstatocystsfunctionshortly and Foton-M3 experiments (Figures S1A, S2C). No specific
after landing results in less confidence to vestibular stimuli effects of prolonged µG (PF snails) or short centrifugation
(habituationofresponse). (OL snails) on inter-tentacle angle were found in Bion-M1
Vestibular stimuli sensed by statocysts were shown to be experiments, although a decrease of inter-tentacle angle in
connected to tentacles withdrawal and generalized defensive all phases of gravitaxis was found in Foton-M3 experiment
reactioninsnails(seeFigure6here;Balaban,1993).Pierantoni (Figure S2C). A possible cause for this discrepancy is a
(1983) showed the connection of the vertical angle of tentacles difference of experimental design: repeated testing of snails in
and the function of snail statocysts using a spinning disk, and Foton-M3 project as opposed to only one test in Bion-M1
speculated that the vertical angle between the tentacles and the snails.
surfaceisassociatedwithfearinthesnailandwilldependonthe Both PF and OL groups show differences in opposite
inclinationofsurface. directions in comparison to three other controls in tentacle
Inter-tentacle angle in land snails has been investigated length at late gravitaxis phase T4 (Figure2A). Both groups are
mostly in the context of olfactory orientation (Chase and statocyst-affected,butinanoppositedirection,asOLsnailswere
Croll, 1981; Davis, 2004; Davis-Berg, 2012), although tentacle shortly centrifuged, and PF snails were exposed to prolonged
connectionwithcollumellarmusculatureandhydroskeletonmay µG (plus very similar overloads as OL during landing). In our
provide some mechanistic relation of the inter-tentacle angle physiological experiments no changes in background statocyst
with muscular or hydraulic tonus of snail; for example, in activity were found, but the response to vestibular stimulation
experiments with predatory snails inter-tentacle angle seems wassignificantlystrongerinPFgroupincomparisontocontrol
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 15 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
FIGURE13|(A),Exampleofasingleunitinstatocystactivityrespondingtoheaddown(c1)tiltonly.Thissingleunitpresumablyrepresentstheactivityoftheunpaired
statoreceptorattheanteriorpoleofstatocyst(star-shaped).(B),Thepositionofrightstatocystondorsalsurfaceofrightpedalganglion,n.vestibularisarebackfilled
withcarboxyfluorescein,calibrationbaris100µm.(C),Schematicdrawingofstatoreceptors’positioninthestatocyst,andtheunpairedcellatanteriorpoleis
star-shaped(basedondataGorgiladzeetal.,2013).
groups, and responses of OL group were weaker compared to methodsusedandalsoadifferentHelixspecies(HelixaspersaL.)
other control groups (Figure7). Such physiological differences wasusedinFoton-M3ISHexperiment.
mayunderlietheobservedbehavioraldifferences.
Adaptation to Spaceflight and
Readaptation Process
Transcriptome Analysis of Statocysts The present study confirmed the electrophysiological findings
Thechangesinneuralcells’morphology,biochemistryandgenes observed in two earlier Foton satellite missions (Balaban et al.,
expression under space flight conditions are widely accepted 2011).ThisstudyalsobenefittedfromtheearlierFotonmissions:
(Honda et al., 2012; Pani et al., 2013; Ranjan et al., 2014; anearlieranimalreturntothelabaftertouchdownwasachieved
Tsybko et al., 2015; Wang et al., 2016; Porseva et al., 2017). (chartered jet and police escort from the airport) and the
Among the most significant differentially expressed genes in experimental protocols evolved to capture as much data as
PFsnailsaretheneuronalspecificprecursorsofneuropeptides, possible in the shortest period of time. Statocyst responses in
neurotransmitterreceptorsubunits,andothergenesinvolvedin PF snails of Bion-M1 were comparable to their counterparts in
cell signaling. Gene expression of both the pedal and FMRF- Foton-M3 (see Figure8), despite more than a 2-fold difference
amide peptides were tested by in situ hybridization in earlier inmissionduration.Thefindingofapostflighthypersensitivity
Foton studies (Balaban et al., 2011), and were found to be to tilt was confirmed at the level of the whole nerve and
differentially expressed in Bion-M1 PF snails in comparison to single statoreceptor analyses (see Figures11–13). The statocyst
ST control snails. In the present Bion-M1 study the genes for background rate remained unchanged as in the 2007 mission.
thesepeptidesweresignificantlydownregulatedinPF-esamples These findings suggest we measured on a plateau portion of
(seeFigure5andTableS1).InFotonstudiespreproFMRF-amide the sensitivity adaptation process, and that the mechanisms
gene was found unaltered in control and postflight statocysts underlying in-flight changes, i.e., the µG-induced influence, in
using the ISH technique, and preproHPep was found to be statocyst responses are established before 12 days in orbit. We
upregulatedincertainreceptorcells.SuchdiscrepancywithBion- wereabletoidentifythecriticaltimeofreadaptationtoEarth1G,
M1 may be explained at least in part by different sensitivity of at 20hafterlanding.Interestingly,hypersensitivityofsensory
∼
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 16 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
neuronsafterspaceflightwasfoundnotonlyinvestibularsystem, pattern of locomotor activity remains with a period of 25h
∼
but also in mechanosensory receptors of human skin (Lowrey inconstantdarknessforatleast20days(BaileyandLazaridou-
etal.,2014). Dimitriadou,1986).
Theresponsesensitivityofutricularafferentsinthevertebrate The interpretation of the present results must take the
toadfish, Opsanus tau, taken post-landing of the orbiters STS- influences of the light-dark cycle into consideration. Bion-M1
90 (NeuroLab; 16 days in orbit) and STS-95 (9 days in orbit) PFsnailsarrivedatthelabintheevening,andthephysiological
missions revealed an induced profound hypersensitivity to recordings were mostly completed that night. The ST and NV
translational acceleration tests (Boyle et al., 2001). Recordings control snails on the other hand were recorded during the
werealsomadeinseparatepopulationsofafferentsatnumerous daytime. If the statocyst contains a self-sustained peripheral
timeperiodsafterlandingtotracktherateofrecovery.Although circadian oscillator, it may affect the physiological responses
some afferents remained hypersensitive, the population as a we measured. To exclude such a possibility we performed an
wholerecoveredwithin24–36hcomparabletoreadaptationtime additionalexperimentthatconfirmedthestatocystresponsewas
of snail sensory cells and experienced astronauts, and a bit independentofthecircadiantimeinourpreparation(FigureS5).
shorterthana2–3dayspacemotionsicknessperiodreportedin However,thetwoBion-M1controlgroupswithcontrolleddark
astronauts during 1G readaptation following 6-month manned conditions(DKandOL,30daysindark,recordedinscotophase)
missions(HeerandPaloski,2006). and the Foton-M3 control group (DK2007, 12 days in dark,
Itcanbearguedinthevertebratethattherateofadaptation recorded in daytime) show a decreased statocyst response in
to spaceflight and its recovery after return to Earth are more comparisontoST(naturallightcycle, 16L:8D)andNV(12:12h
∼
consistent with a restructuring of the synaptic organization LD cycle) control groups (see Figures7, 8). Despite housed in
between the hair cells and the afferents, such as adjusting the the dark during the missions, Bion-M1 PF and PF2007 snails
number of synaptic ribbons or bodies (Ross, 2000), than a showed an increased statoreceptor sensitivity to tilt stimuli,
restructuringtheweight-lendingotolith(seebelow).Thetoadfish whetherrecordedatnightorduringthedaytime.Thisincrease
studycouldnotidentifywhetherthehypersensitivityoriginated sensitivityfoundonlyinPFsnailswaspresumablytheresultof
inthehaircell,thehaircell-afferentcomplex,orpostsynaptically the space environment and not from influences of the housing
in the afferent itself. In our Foton and Bion-M1 studies in ortimeofrecording.Howtheseexternalfactorsinteracttoshape
the snail statocyst we recorded directly from the output of the the statocyst response is unclear, as well as whether or not the
statoreceptors themselves. Although it is tempting to speculate interaction occurs at the same site of plasticity. Another route
that the hair cells in vertebrates are also the targets of the throughwhichthelight-darkcyclemightmodulatethestatocyst
sensitivityadjustmenttoalteredgravityloads,directevidenceis activity is via the vestibular efferent fibers (Williamson, 1986;
stilllacking. Janse et al., 1988; Tsubata et al., 2003; Sakakibara et al., 2005),
Vestibularsensitivityinthestatocystofthegardensnailwas that may be entrained by a central circadian oscillator (Attia,
recentlystudiedfollowingexposuretohyper-gravityconditions 2004).Wecomparedtheperi-stimuluscurvesofefferentactivity
using centrifugation (Popova and Boyle, 2015). A significant and found no significant difference between PF and control
decrease in response sensitivity to head-down tilt was detected snails(seeFigure10),therebyexcludingtheefferentneuronsof
after 16- and 32-day (but not 4-day) exposures to a 1.4G dynamically modulating the statocyst response on a tilt-by-tilt
[resultant √1G (Earth)2 1G (centripetal)2]. After a 7-day basis. Whether the substrate for an effect of light-dark cycle is
= +
recoveryperiodinnormal1Gtheresponsesreturnedtonormal. withinthestatocystitselforelsewhereremainstobedetermined.
Inaccordancewiththepresentstudytheprevalentgravitylevel
appears represented as a continuum in statocyst function over Inertial Mass as Adaptation Mechanism
themeasuredperiodsoftime.Criticaldatathataremissingand A widely discussed mechanism of adaptation to the µG
subject to future investigations are the initial responses of the environment is an adjustment of the weight of statoconia
statocystandorganismtoanabruptchangeingravityload,the (invertebrates) or otoconia (vertebrates) (Wiederhold et al.,
functionalandstructuralconsequencesoflong-termexposureto 2000;Edelmann,2002;Gorgiladze,2002).Depositionofcalcium
alteredgravity,andthetimecourseofrecoveryoffunctionasa carbonatewillaffectachangeinthemass,butnottheweight,in
functionofloadanddurationofexposure. space,butwouldrevealitselfafterreturntothenormalgravity.
Ultrastructural studies in Helix found statoconia growth, i.e.,
size and amount, after long-term exposures to µG on Mir and
Light Cycle Influences on the Statocyst
ISS space stations (Gorgiladze, 2002; Gorgiladze et al., 2011).
Response In Gorgiladze’s (2002) study, statoconia size increased with µG
Activity recorded in the lip sensory nerve in semi-intact Helix exposures between 40 and 148 days, but for shorter exposures
preparations can reflect the circadian phase to which the snail thedatalessclearasthestatoconiasizeafter14dayswaslarger
is adapted (Voss et al., 1997). In that study chemical stimuli thanafter31days.Statoconiagrowthwasreversedafterreturnto
presentedinthelightelicitedanincreasedneuralresponsewhen 1Ginabout30days.Intheirpostflightsnailsthestatoconiawere
they corresponded in time to the snail’s normal active phase oftenincrustatedby“flakes”orcoveredbyalayerofdistinctive
of behavior, viz. scotophase. This species is known to have an crustindicatingadepositionofcalciumcarbonate.Ourlimited
endogenous circadian oscillator entrained by light (Bailey and morphologicaldatafromBion-M1postflightstatoconiadidnot
Lazaridou-Dimitriadou, 1986; Attia, 2004), and the circadian showanyofthesecharacteristicfeatures(seeFigure4).However,
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 17 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
caution is needed because our sample size was restricted to a replicated this finding in the Bion-M1 control groups, but
single animal in 3 groups and the flight durations were not the PF snails of Bion-M1 remained spatial tuned to preferred
similar.Thiscompensatoryprocessrequiresmoreexamination. directions (Figures S8, S9). Because of the robustness of the
Onemorefactorispertinenttothedifferentresultsreportedin new results we reject our earlier hypothesis that spaceflight
Helix studies: in our study adult animals (20–25g) were used, influencesdirectionalselectivity.Directionalselectivitywasalso
whereasinthepreviousstudiessnailswereeitherjuvenile(0.3– maintained in vertebrate otolith afferents with hypersensitivity
2g)oryoungadults(9–15g).Theeffectofstatoconiagrowthin after spaceflight (Boyle et al., 2001) and in centrifuged snails
µG was more pronounced in young snails (Gorgiladze, 2002), havingreducedoveralltiltsensitivity(PopovaandBoyle,2015).
and was insignificant in adult fish otoconia (Wiederhold et al., We consider this spatial tuning as a fundamental property of
2003). statocystfunctionandnotreadilysusceptibletoplasticchanges.
In addition, our physiological data showed no difference in By spike sorting of the statocyst nerve activity we were able to
the magnitude of the sensitivity changes between the postflight distinguishtheactivityofsinglesensorycells.Insomecasesthe
groups of our separate missions having different duration of cell activity could identify its possible location in the statocyst,
µGexposure(showninFigure8).Thus,thereisnosubstantive like ventrally located ciliary cells or frontally from caudally
evidenceforamechanisminducingachangeinstatoconiamass located cells. We tried in all cases to find the directionality at
forsnailsexposedtoµGforlessthanamonth.Fortheprocess the single unit level, but the most active cells in our records
ofreadaptationtonormalgravity,postflightgroupsofBion-M1 frequently showed little to no direction tuning to tilt presented
andFoton-M3studiesbothdividedintotwodistinctsubgroups in our protocol; these cells are presumably ventrally located in
bythecriticaltimeofrecording20hafterlanding.Itisevenless the statocyst and code more the position of animal in space
likelythatchangesinstatoconiaplayanyroleinthisreadaptation than stimulus direction (see Figure11). In the nudibranch
process of such short duration. Taking into account 20h as Hermissendathe13statocystsensorycellshaveciliaorganizedfor
criticaltimeofreadaptation,neuralplasticityofstatocystsensory multidirectionalsensitivity(Kuzirianetal.,1981).InHelixsome
statoreceptors themselves, central circuits, or both might be statocyst sensory cells might share a form of this organization
bettercandidates. in functional terms. Using single unit analysis we identified a
few sensory cells that responded to only one of the two tested
Role of Efferent Vestibular Neurons
directions of tilt with a phasic-tonic reaction (see Figure12).
The vertebrate inner ear sensory organs receive centripetal If we consider this to represent a multidirectional sensitivity
innervation of their hair cells (and the dendrites of afferent of a statoreceptor, this type of response might be constructed
neurons) by centrally located efferent neurons. This strategy in frontally and caudally located statoreceptors by a physical
is also present in snail statocyst: the statocyst nerve contains contactonlywiththeedgeoftheinertialmassinthehorizontal
the axons of the statoreceptors as well as axons of neurons position of statocyst. Activity of these cells allows the CNS
from the cerebral ganglion on each side. How the efferent to decode the direction of stimuli from the statocyst output.
neuronsinfluencethegravityandaccelerationsensationsduring Comparing the activity of identified statoreceptors, position-
and after space flight is unknown. Assuming the efferent coding ventrally located cells form between 50 and 80% of the
innervationservestotunethereceptor’sresponsetoacceleration statocyst output (for OL: 20 spikes/s, for PF-e: 30 spikes/s
∼ ∼
in a behaviorally relevant context (Goldberg et al., 2002; during tilt), and direction-coding cells contribute 15% of the
Boyle et al., 2009; Rabbitt et al., 2010), µG might trigger a netresponse. ∼
shut down of the efferent system to allow an amplification The only viable candidate to explain the existence of
of any input, now weak or absent, signal. If so, this might directional response with higher sensitivity (“head down,” c1)
temporarily lead to a hypersensitivity in snail statoreceptors. is the unpaired sensory neuron at the anterior pole of the
In an attempt to address this key issue, we analyzed the firing statocyst(seeFigure13).Respondingtoperturbationsofvertical
behavior of presumed efferent neurons to tilt and found it orientation of the organism, including human, in the “head
was monotonous within each examined group of snails. Thus, down” direction are of critical importance for self-protection,
direct evidence that the efferents play a role in the postflight and the unpaired sensory neuron at the anterior pole of the
statoreceptor hypersensitivity was not found. We cannot rule statocystaddstothenetinformationsignaloftiltstimuliinthis
out however that the efferent neurons were studied in a biologicallymeaningfuldirection.
behaviorally irrelevant context, namely in the isolated neural Marine mollusks require a fast and reliable recognition of
preparationandnotintheintactanimal,andpostflightbutnot spatial orientation from variable external cues to maintain
inflight. proper balance and 3D navigation in the sea, and thus their
statocyst is the most studied among invertebrates (Wood and
Directionality of Response and Single Unit
Von Baumgarten, 1972; Alkon, 1975; Janse, 1983; Budelmann
Analysis and Williamson, 1994; Deliagina et al., 1998). In freshwater
Previouslywereported(Balabanetal.,2011)thatthedifferential species, pulmonate Lymnaea, the statocyst output is important
sensitivityofstatocystresponsestostimuliofdifferentdirections for periodical trips to the surface for breathing (Janse, 1982).
(c1>c2,c3,c4)seenincontrolsnailswaslostintheFoton-M3 Janse et al. (1988) compared the statoreceptors firing rate
postflightsnails,andwehypothesizedaweakeningofdirectional and gain in marine Aplysia and freshwater Lymnaea and
selectivity might occur immediately after spaceflight. Here, we speculated that the difference in ecology of the animals leads
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 18 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
to a more sensitive statocyst in Aplysia. For land snails ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
vestibular function is important for gravitaxis reaction, when
the animals climb to elevated positions for diurnal rest in hot ThisstudywassupportedbyRFBRgrantNo12-04-01166-a,and
and dry day-time, and when returning back to the soil at byRSFgrant14-25-00072(transcriptomeanalysis).
dusk (Cowie, 1985; Aubry et al., 2006; Di Lellis et al., 2012). AuthorsthankthescientificandpersonnelstaffattheInstitute
Another obvious biological significance of statocyst function of Biomedical Problems of the Russian Academy of Science
is its role in the withdrawal reaction, as a sudden change (Moscow)forthesuccessfulBionM-1missionandextraordinary
of the body position may preclude an attack of a predator. efforts to arrange for an early arrival of experimental animals
In agreement with ecology of land snails, our physiological fromlandingsiteinsouthernRussiatothelabinMoscow.
data show that the Helix statocyst operates more for coding Authors thank Dr. Andrey Azovsky (MSU) and Andrey
the orientation of animal’s body than fast changes in its Anikin(LundUniversity)fortheirhelpwithstatistics.
direction. RBsupportedinpartbyNASAgrant(11_Omni_2_0002)and
fromNASAHumanResearchandSpaceBiologyPrograms.YP
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS supportedbyNASAPostdoctoralProgramadministeredbythe
OakRidgeAssociatedUniversities.
Research concept and design: NA, AM, VI, IZ, RB, and PB.
Collectionand/orassemblyofdata:NA,AV,MR,TK,AM,AZ, SUPPLEMENTARY MATERIAL
VI,ML,IZ,YP,RB,andPB.Behavioranalysisandinterpretation:
NA,AV,MR,andTK.Electrophysiology:NA,MR,AM,AZ,ML, TheSupplementaryMaterialforthisarticlecanbefoundonline
IZ.SEM:NA,IN,andRB.RNA-Seqandbioinformatics:SV,PK, at: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fncel.2017.
EC,AK,andLU.Statisticalanalysis:NA.Writingthearticle:NA 00348/full#supplementary-material and at OSF https://osf.io/
andRB.Criticalrevisionofthearticle:NA,IZ,RB,andPB. v5brf/
REFERENCES
Chomczynski,P.,andSacchi,N.(1987).SinglestepmethodtoisolatetotalRNA.
Anal.Biochem.162,156–159.
Alkon,D.L.(1975).Responsesofhaircellstostatocystrotation.J.Gen.Physiol.66, Clément,G.,Bukley,A.,andPaloski,W.(2007).“Thegravityofthesituation,”in
507–530.doi:10.1085/jgp.66.4.507 ArtificialGravity.TheSpaceTechnologyLibrary,Vol20,edsG.ClémentandA.
Attia,J.(2004).Behaviouralrhythmsoflandsnailsinthefield.Biol.RhythmRes. Bukle(NewYork,NY:Springer),1–32.
35,35–41.doi:10.1080/09291010412331313223 Cohen,B.,Yakushin,S.B.,Holstein,G.R.,Dai,M.,Tomko,D.L.,Badakva,A.M.,
Aubry,S.,Labaune,C.,Magnin,F.,Roche,P.,andKiss,L.(2006).Activeand etal.(2005).“Vestibularexperimentsinspace,”inExperimentationwithAnimal
passivedispersalofaninvadinglandsnailinMediterraneanFrance.J.Anim. ModelsinSpace,edG.Sonnenfeld(Amsterdam:ElsevierBV),105–164.
Ecol.75,802–813.doi:10.1111/j.1365-2656.2006.01100.x Cowie, R. H. (1985). Microhabitat choice and high temperature tolerance in
Bailey,S.E.R.,andLazaridou-Dimitriadou,M.(1986).Circadiancomponentsin the land snail Theba pisana (Mollusca: Gastropoda). J. Zool. 207, 201–211.
thedailyactivityofHelixlucorumL.fromnorthernGreece.J.MolluscanStud. doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.1985.tb04924.x
52,190–192.doi:10.1093/mollus/52.3.190 Davis,E.C.(2004).OdourtrackingtoafoodsourcebythegastropodMeridolum
Balaban,P.(1993).Behavioralneurobiologyoflearninginterrestrialsnails.Prog. gulosum (Gould, 1864) from New South Wales, Australia (Camaenidae:
Neurobiol.41,1–19.doi:10.1016/0301-0082(93)90038-T Eupulmonata:Mollusca).MolluscanRes.24,187–191.doi:10.1071/MR04008
Balaban, P. M. (2002). Cellular mechanisms of behavioral plasticity Davis-Berg,E.C.(2012).ThepredatorysnailEuglandinaroseasuccessfullyfollows
in terrestrial snail. Neurosci. Biobehav. Rev. 26, 597–630. mucoustrailsofbothnativeandnon-nativepreysnails.Invertebr.Biol.131,
doi:10.1016/S0149-7634(02)00022-2 1–10.doi:10.1111/j.1744-7410.2011.00251.x
Balaban, P. M., Malyshev, A. Y., Ierusalimsky, V. N., Aseyev, N., Korshunova, Deliagina,T.G.,Arshavsky,Y.I.,andOrlovsky,G.N.(1998).Controlofspatial
T. A., Bravarenko, N. I., et al. (2011). Functional changes in the orientationinamollusc.Nature393,172–175.doi:10.1038/30251
snail statocyst system elicited by microgravity. PLoS ONE 6:e17710. Demontis, G. C., Germani, M. M., Caiani, E. G., Barravecchia, I., Passino, C.,
doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0017710 andAngeloni,D.(2017).Humanpathophysiologicaladaptationstothespace
Boyle,R.,Mensinger,A.F.,Yoshida,K.,Usui,S.,Intravaia,A.,Tricas,T.,etal. environment.Front.Physiol.8:547.doi:10.3389/fphys.2017.00547
(2001).NeuralreadaptationtoEarth’sgravityfollowingreturnfromspace.J. Di Lellis, M. A., Seifan, M., Troschinski, S., Mazzia, C., Capowiez, Y.,
Neurophysiol.86,2118–2122. Triebskorn, R., et al. (2012). Solar radiation stress in climbing snails:
Boyle,R.,Rabbitt,R.D.,andHighstein,S.M.(2009).Efferentcontrolofhair behaviouralandintrinsicfeaturesdefinetheHsp70levelinnaturalpopulations
cell and afferent responses in the semicircular canals. J. Neurophysiol. 102, of Xeropicta derbentina (Pulmonata). Cell Stress Chaperones 17, 717–727.
1513–1525.doi:10.1152/jn.91367.2008 doi:10.1007/s12192-012-0344-4
Bracchi,F.,Gualierotti,T.,Morabito,A.,andRocca,E.(1975).Multidayrecordings Edelmann, E. (2002). Function-morphological investigations of fish inner ear
fromtheprimaryneuronsofthestatoreceptorsofthelabyrinthofthebullfrog. otolithsasbasisforinterpretationofhumanspacesickness.ActaAstronaut.
Theeffectofanextendedperiodof“weightlessness”ontherateoffiringat 50,261–266.doi:10.1016/S0094-5765(01)00179-5
restandinresponsetostimulationbybriefperiodsofcentrifugation(OFO-A Fitts, R. H., Riley, D. R., and Widrick, J. J. (2001). Functional and structural
orbitingexperiment).ActaOtolaryngol.Suppl.334,1–27. adaptationsofskeletalmuscletomicrogravity.J.Exp.Biol.204,3201–3208.
Budelmann,B.(1988).“Morphologicaldiversityofequilibriumreceptorsystems Goldberg,J.M.,Wilson,V.J.,Cullen,K.E.,Angelaki,D.E.,Broussard,A.M.,
inaquaticInvertebrates,”inSensoryBiologyofAquaticAnimals,edsJ.Atema, Büttner-Ennever,J.,etal.(2002).TheVestibularSytem:ASixthSense.Oxford;
R.Fay,A.Popper,andW.Tavolga(NewYork,NY:Springer),757–782. NewYork,NY:OxfordUniversityPress.
Budelmann,B.U.,andWilliamson,R.(1994).Directionalsensitivityofhaircell Gorgiladze,G.,Bukia,R.,Kalandarishvili,E.,Taktakishvili,A.,Davitashvili,M.,
afferentsintheOctopusstatocyst.J.Exp.Biol.187,245–259. Gelashvili,N.,etal.(2013).[Lightmicroscopyofstatocystcellelementsfrom
Chase, R., and Croll, R. P. (1981). Tentacular function in snail olfactory Helixlucorum(Spaceexperimentaboardtheorbitalstation“Mir”)].Aviakosm.
orientation.J.Comp.Physiol.A143,357–362.doi:10.1007/BF00611173 Ekolog.Med.47,6–12.
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 19 November2017|Volume11|Article348
Aseyevetal. AdaptiveChangesintheVestibularSystemofSnail
Gorgiladze, G. I., Bukiia, R. D., Kalandarishvili, E. L., Korotkova, E. V., Rabbitt,R.D.,Boyle,R.,andHighstein,S.M.(2010).Mechanicalamplification
Taktakishvili,A.D.,Davitashvili,M.T.,etal.(2011).Plasticityofstastocyst by hair cells in the semicircular canals. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 107,
inertialmassinterraneousgastropodshelixlucorumandpomatiasrivularein 3864–3869.doi:10.1073/pnas.0906765107
alteringgravitationalfield(microgravity,hypergravity).AviakosmEkolog.Med. Ranjan,A.,Behari,J.,andMallick,B.N.(2014).Cytomorphometricchangesin
45,28–33. hippocampalCA1neuronsexposedtosimulatedmicrogravityusingratsas
Gorgiladze,G.I.(2002).Weightlessnessstimulatesgrowthofstatoconia.Dokl.Biol. model.Front.Neurol.5:77.doi:10.3389/fneur.2014.00077
Sci.384,216–220.doi:10.1023/A:1016013407107 Ross,M.D.(2000).Changesinribbonsynapsesandroughendoplasmicreticulum
Gualtierotti,T.(1977).Thevestibularfunctionresearchprogrammeasapartof of rat utricular macular hair cells in weightlessness. Acta Otolaryngol. 120,
theSpacelabproject:aninvestigationoftheeffectoffreefallonunitaryand 490–499.doi:10.1080/000164800750045983
integrated vestibular activity. Proc. R. Soc. Lond. B Biol. Sci. 199, 493–503. Sakakibara, M., Aritaka, T., Iizuka, A., Suzuki, H., Horikoshi, T., and
doi:10.1098/rspb.1977.0157 Lukowiak, K. (2005). Electrophysiological responses to light of neurons in
Hallgren,E.,Kornilova,L.,Fransen,E.,Glukhikh,D.,Moore,S.T.,Clement,G., the eye and statocyst of Lymnaea stagnalis. J. Neurophysiol. 93, 493–507.
etal.(2016).Decreasedotolith-mediatedvestibularresponsein25astronauts doi:10.1152/jn.00692.2004
induced by long-duration spaceflight. J. Neurophysiol. 115, 3045–3051. Straka, H., Fritzsch, B., and Glover, J. C. (2014). Connecting ears to eye
doi:10.1152/jn.00065.2016 muscles: evolution of a ’simple’ reflex arc. Brain Behav. Evol. 83, 162–175.
Heer, M., and Paloski, W. H. (2006). Space motion sickness: incidence, doi:10.1159/000357833
etiology, and countermeasures. Auton. Neurosci. 129, 77–79. Tsubata,N.,Iizuka,A.,Horikoshi,T.,andSakakibara,M.(2003).Photoresponse
doi:10.1016/j.autneu.2006.07.014 fromthestatocysthaircellinLymnaeastagnalis.Neurosci.Lett.337,46–50.
Honda,Y.,Higashibata,A.,Matsunaga,Y.,Yonezawa,Y.,Kawano,T.,Higashitani, doi:10.1016/S0304-3940(02)01289-2
A., et al. (2012). Genes down-regulated in spaceflight are involved in the Tsybko, A. S., Ilchibaeva, T. V., Kulikov, A. V., Kulikova, E. A., Krasnov, I.
controloflongevityinCaenorhabditiselegans.Sci.Rep.2:487.doi:10.1038/srep B., Sychev, V. N., et al. (2015). Effect of microgravity on glial cell line-
00487 derived neurotrophic factor and cerebral dopamine neurotrophic factor
Janse, C. (1982). Sensory systems involved in gravity orientation in the gene expression in the mouse brain. J. Neurosci. Res. 93, 1399–1404.
pulmonate snail Lymnaea stagnalis. J. Comp. Physiol. 145, 311–319. doi:10.1002/jnr.23600
doi:10.1007/BF00619335 Voss, M., Kottowski, K., and Wünnenberg, W. (1997). Neurophysiological
Janse,C.(1983).ThefunctionofthestatocystsensorycellsinAplysialimacina.J. indication of a diurnal rhythmicity in chemosensitivity of the snail Helix
Comp.Physiol.150,359–370.doi:10.1007/bf00605025 pomatiaL.Comp.Biochem.Physiol.A116,37–42.
Janse,C.,VanDerWilt,G.J.,VanDerRoest,M.,andPieneman,A.W.(1988). Wang,X.,Du,J.,Wang,D.,Zeng,F.,Wei,Y.,Wang,F.,etal.(2016).Effectsof
Intracellularlyrecordedresponsestotiltandefferentinputofstatocystsensory simulatedmicrogravityonhumanbrainnervoustissue.Neurosci.Lett.627,
cellsinthepulmonatesnailLymnaeastagnalis.Comp.Biochem.Physiol.A90, 199–204.doi:10.1016/j.neulet.2016.06.004
269–278.doi:10.1016/0300-9629(88)91116-4 Wiederhold, M. L., Harrison, J. L., and Gao, W. (2003). A critical
Kreidl,A.(1893).WeitereBeiträgezurPhysiologiedesOhrlabyrinths,SBerAkad period for gravitational effects on otolith formation. J. Vestib. Res. 13,
WissWienmath-naturwKl102.149–173. 205–214.
Kuzirian, A. M., Alkon, D. L., and Harris, L. G. (1981). An infraciliary Wiederhold,M.L.,Harrison,J.L.,Parker,K.,andNomura,H.(2000).Otoliths
networkinstatocysthaircells.J.Neurocytol.10,497–514.doi:10.1007/BF012 developedinmicrogravity.J.Gravit.Physiol.7,P39–P42.
62418 Williamson,R.(1986).EfferentactivityintheOctopusstatocystnerves.J.Comp.
Lowrey, C. R., Perry, S. D., Strzalkowski, N. D., Williams, D. R., Wood, S. Physiol.A158,125–132.doi:10.1007/bf00614526
J., and Bent, L. R. (2014). Selective skin sensitivity changes and sensory Wilson,V.J.,andJones,J.M.(1979).MammalianVestibularPhysiology.New
reweighting following short-duration space flight. J. Appl. Physiol. 116, York,NY:PlenumPress.
683–692.doi:10.1152/japplphysiol.01200.2013 Wood, J., and Von Baumgarten, R. J. (1972). Activity recorded from the
Pani, G., Samari, N., Quintens, R., De Saint-Georges, L., Meloni, M., Baatout, statocyst nerve of Pleurobranchaea californica during rotation and at
S., et al. (2013). Morphological and physiological changes in mature in different tilts. Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A Comp. Physiol. 43, 495–502.
vitro neuronal networks towards exposure to short-, middle- or long- doi:10.1016/0300-9629(72)90236-8
termsimulatedmicrogravity.PLoSONE8:e73857.doi:10.1371/journal.pone.
0073857 Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors declare that the research was
Pierantoni, R. (1983). A fovea for gravity. A quantitative study on antennal conductedintheabsenceofanycommercialorfinancialrelationshipsthatcould
compensatory movement in Helix. Bolletino di zoologia 50, 269–283. beconstruedasapotentialconflictofinterest.
doi:10.1080/11250008309439452
Popova, Y., and Boyle, R. (2015). Neural response in vestibular organ of Copyright©2017Aseyev,Vinarskaya,Roshchin,Korshunova,Malyshev,Zuzina,
Helix aspersa to centrifugation and re-adaptation to normal gravity. J. Ierusalimsky,Lemak,Zakharov,Novikov,Kolosov,Chesnokova,Volkova,Kasianov,
Comp. Physiol. A Neuroethol. Sens. Neural Behav. Physiol. 201, 717–729. Uroshlev, Popova, Boyle and Balaban. This is an open-access article distributed
doi:10.1007/s00359-015-1003-x underthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttributionLicense(CCBY).Theuse,
Porseva,V.V.,Shilkin,V.V.,Strelkov,A.A.,Krasnov,I.B.,andMasliukov,P.M. distribution or reproduction in other forums is permitted, provided the original
(2017).Changesintheneurochemicalcompositionofmotorneuronsofthe author(s)orlicensorarecreditedandthattheoriginalpublicationinthisjournal
spinalcordinmiceunderconditionsofspaceflight.Bull.Exp.Biol.Med.162, is cited, in accordance with accepted academic practice. No use, distribution or
336–339.doi:10.1007/s10517-017-3609-1 reproductionispermittedwhichdoesnotcomplywiththeseterms.
FrontiersinCellularNeuroscience|www.frontiersin.org 20 November2017|Volume11|Article348